Too long didn't read

“I have made this letter longer than usual, because I lack the time to make it short” Pascal[1] Too long; didn't read (abbreviated tl;dr and tldr;) is a shorthand notation added by an editor indicating a passage appeared to be too long to invest the time to digest. Long used on the Internet,[2] it has birthed this wikilink WP:TL;DR to indicate a cited passage is being protested. See the Wikipedia article TL;DR. Wall of text is kindred. The tl;dr label is often used to point out grossly excessive verbosity, or to introduce a short summation of a longer piece.[3] It can be misused as a tactic to thwart collaborative editing, or, worse, a stoop to ridicule. This essay examines tl;dr as used in Wikipedia discussions, offering insight into the cause of excessive length, suggestions on how to reduce it, and a reminder to always exercise civility with other editors when paring. 1 Reasons for length Many people who edit Wikipedia do so because they enjoy writing; however, that passion can result in overlong composition. This reflects a lack of time or commitment to refine an effort through successively more concise drafts. With some application, natural redundancies and digressions can often be eliminated. Recall the venerable paraphrase of Pascal, “I made this so long because I did not have time to make it shorter.” A second contributing factor can be that a writer incorrectly believes long sentences and big words make them appear learned.[4] Or an inexperienced contributor may fear they will not be clear enough with fewer words. Even capable authors recognize the risk of distorting what they're trying to express in too brief passages.[5] Some policies and procedures can encourage overlong prose due to imposing arbitrary limits. The Did you know? process requires established articles to have a fivefold expansion of prose within a seven-day window to be considered for listing on the main page. This can encourage over-verbose writing to game the system. A trusted aphorism states that “brevity is the soul of wit.”[6] Similarly, “omit needless words.”[7] Editors are encouraged to write concisely and use plain vocabulary when possible, always keeping in mind English may not be a reader’s native tongue. If length is essential, a short summary is advised. While bloated composition may reflect the emotions of an editor, it should be noted that some people are constitutionally loquacious. It is impossible for you, as an editor to effect either of these before the fact. When editing, always respect Wikipedia policies and editors’ feelings. Take the time to distill your thoughts for better communication and rapport. 2 Reducing wordiness Text should be trimmed if redundant or split into another article when appropriate. See: summary style and WP:SPINOFF. Be clear before excising copy that it can't be refined and kept. Tagging bloated plot summaries at movie, book, and play pages with the {{plot}} template is not as good as winnowing them yourself. Some linguists (such as Geoffrey K. Pullum in posts at Language Log) criticize Strunk & White's advice “omit needless words” in the fear that unskilled editors may mistake even necessary length for dross and delete it. Strunk and White, however, were unambiguous that concision does not require “the writer make all his sentences short, or that he avoid all detail and treat his subjects only in outline, but that every word tell.” Deleting is not always equivalent to improving, and intelligently differentiating the cases deserves care. 3 Maintain civility Being too quick to pointedly mention this essay may come across as dismissive and rude. Preferably, create a section on their talk page and politely offer advice there. Avoid ad hominems. Substituting a flippant “tl;dr” for reasoned response and cordiality stoops to ridicule and amounts to thought-terminating cliché. Just as one cannot prove through verbosity, neither can one prove by wielding a four letter acronym. When illumination, patience, and wisdom are called for, answer with them. 4 Exampl